Optogenetic interrogation of neural circuits: technology for probing mammalian brain structures

Elucidation of the neural substrates underlying complex animal behaviors depends on precise activity control tools, as well as
compatible readout methods. Recent developments in optogenetics have addressed this need, opening up new possibilities for
systems neuroscience. Interrogation of even deep neural circuits can be conducted by directly probing the necessity and sufficiency
of defined circuit elements with millisecond-scale, cell type-specific optical perturbations, coupled with suitable readouts such
as electrophysiology, optical circuit dynamics measures and freely moving behavior in mammals. Here we collect in detail our
strategies for delivering microbial opsin genes to deep mammalian brain structures in vivo, along with protocols for integrating the
resulting optical control with compatible readouts (electrophysiological, optical and behavioral). The procedures described here,
from initial virus preparation to systems-level functional readout, can be completed within 4–5 weeks. Together, these methods
may help in providing circuit-level insight into the dynamics underlying complex mammalian behaviors in health and disease.

INTRODUCTION
Understanding the circuit-level functional organization of the
brain will have important implications for both basic and clinical
neuroscience. In particular, we have found that optical manipulation
of activity in neural circuits with light-sensitive rhodopsins, such as
the Chlamydomonas channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) 1,2 , Volvox channel­
rhodopsin-1 (VChR1) 3 , Natronomonas halorhodopsin (NpHR) 4
(Fig. 1a) and synthetic rhodopsin/GPCR chimeras 5 (optoXRs;
Fig. 1b), may help in illuminating both the normal circuit function
and major disease mechanisms 6–19 . Here we illustrate the critical
steps we have developed for the implementation of this optogenetic 6,7
approach to probe the function of deep brain circuit elements in
mammals. We first review the basic optogenetic control tools we have
described, followed by discussion of optimization of expression, target-
ing and readout technology. We then present the necessary materials
and outline a detailed series of our experimental protocols for integrat-
ing optogenetic neuronal manipulation with in vivo and ex vivo readout
methods, including electrophysiological and optical measures.
Experimental design considerations
Temporally precise genetically encoded control.  Classical neuro­
nal manipulation techniques (electrical, pharmacological and
genetic) either simultaneously affect surrounding cells and proc-
esses in addition to the target population or have slow kinetics and
poor reversibility, thereby severely limiting the strength of con-
clusions that can be drawn. To overcome these spatial and tem-
poral limitations, microbial and chimeric-vertebrate opsin genes
(Table 1) have been developed recently to control highly-defined
electrical (Fig. 1a) and biochemical (Fig. 1b) activity with cell-
type selectivity, high temporal precision and rapid reversibility. As
most neurons in the brain are not naturally light-sensitive, selective
expression of opsin genes in targeted neural populations makes it
possible to specifically control the activity in these populations,
and the resulting fast on–off kinetics make it possible to evoke or
inhibit neural activity within milliseconds, on a timescale relevant
to the physiological brain functions.
At present, light-activated cation channels from two distinct algal
species, channelrhodopsin-2 from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
(ChR2) 1,2,20 and channelrhodopsin-1 from Volvox carteri (VChR1) 3
(Fig. 1a, left and middle), have proven to be a powerful pair of tools
for controlling neural activity. ChR2 is maximally activated by blue
light at 470 nm, whereas VChR1 remains significantly light sensitive
even at 589 nm, a wavelength at which (importantly) ChR2 is no
longer responsive (Fig. 1c). Both ChR2 (deactivation time constant
~12 ms) and VChR1 (deactivation time constant ~120 ms) are able
to transduce trains of millisecond-duration light flashes into defined
spike trains up to 30–50 Hz 1,2,8 . Conversely, the chloride-pumping
halorhodopsin from Natronomonas pharaonis (NpHR) has been
shown to hyperpolarize neurons upon illumination with yellow
light (Fig. 1c). Because of sufficient spectral separation, NpHR and
ChR2 can simultaneously be expressed in the same neurons to enable
bidirectional optical control of neural activity. Moreover, both use
all-trans retinal as the chromophore, which is abundantly present in
mammalian brain tissue, and therefore these optogenetic tools are
fully functional without the addition of chemical cofactors in vivo 4 .
Optimizing expression and function.  For all of these proteins,
expression issues will determine crucial aspects of perform-
ance. For example, because of the inactivation kinetics of ChR2,
higher-expressing cells will be able to follow fast spike frequen-
cies for longer periods of time, as these cells will be able to
employ larger pools of the remaining non-inactivated ChR2. As
another example, without the proper targeting sequences, high
levels of micro­bial protein expression in mammalian cells can
result in the aggregation of misfolded proteins in the Golgi, the
endoplasmic reticulum and other intracellular compartments.
As the conductance of individual rhodopsins is relatively low
(picosiemens or less for ChR2, and even lower for NpHR as a pump, due
to its 1:1 coupling between photon absorption and ion flux), it is
critical to maximize the number of molecules that are properly
integrated into the cytoplasmic membrane, in addition to opti-
mizing transcription of the opsin genes. For this reason, we have
been constructing enhanced versions of halorhodopsin (eNpHR)
by optimizing membrane trafficking sequences to increase the
efficiency of membrane targeting 21,22 . eNpHR exhibits higher
levels of membrane expression and more robust photocurrents,
and similar modifications could be applied to optimize other
microbial light-activated proteins for enhanced photocurrents.
Molecular engineering is also leading to expanded and refined
function of these microbial proteins by altering spectral proper­ties,
conductance or kinetics. One point mutation (H134R in ChR2
(ref. 23)) has been shown to result in 2–3× enhanced cellular
photocurrents 24 (but at the expense of slowed deactivation).
Channelrhodopsin deactivation can be slowed so much that a novel
utility is achieved; several C128 point mutants of ChR2 exhibit
profound bistability, converting a brief pulse of light into a stable
step in membrane potential 25 . Transduced cells are (at steady state)
responsive to light at >100× lower light levels because of delayed
exit of these proteins from the open state 25 . These C128 mutants
are still activated by blue (470 nm) light, but photocurrents elicited
by the opening of ChR2(C128A) and ChR2(C128S) can effectively
be terminated by a pulse of green (542 nm) light. These engineered
step function opsins (SFO) can optically sensitize cells to native
patterns of input, by providing a sustained step depolarization of
the target cell membrane potential that can increase excitability.
In many settings this approach will be preferable to simply driv-
ing user-defined trains with ­possibly inappropriate spike times.
440 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols
b
NpHR
VChR1 589 nm 589 nm
Gs
protocol
500
550
600
Wavelength (nm)
650
Opsin XFP
WPRE
polyA ITR
loxP
Cre-dependent AAV vector
Related experimental leverage in terms of more natural control of
native spike timing may also result from use of the optoXRs (Fig. 1;
Table 1), which achieve temporally precise modulation of intra­
cellular biochemical activity rather than direct control of spiking; of
course, in some settings direct control of spike timing is the desired
effect, in which case ChR2 or VChR1 are employed.
Genetic strategies for targeting expression to specific neural
populations.  Opsin genes can be selectively expressed in defined
subsets of neurons in the brain using a variety of expression tar-
geting strategies 26–28 . Here we focus on those techniques that have
been shown to be effective in achieving functional expression
of optogenic proteins in vivo.
Viral expression systems: unlike many other genetic targeting
strategies requiring the use of transgenic animal models, viral
vectors 29 based on lentivirus and adeno-associated virus (AAV) can
be used to target opsin gene expression in a wide range of experi-
mental subjects ranging from rodents to primates. Specifically, high
titer lentivirus and AAV-based vectors (>10 9 transducing units (TU)
ml  − 1 for lentivirus and >10 12 genome copies (gc) ml  − 1 for AAV vec-
tors) can be easily produced in Biosafety Level 2-certified tissue-
culture facilities in 1–2 weeks, or alternatively obtained through
a number of virus production facilities (e.g., Viral Vector Core,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA,
and Virapur, LLC., San Diego, California, USA). These transduction
methods have been shown to achieve high levels of functional opsin
gene expression in neurons for several months.
Although most common AAV (Fig. 1d, top) and lentivirus
(Fig. 1d, middle) vectors carry strong ubiquitous or pan-neuronal
promoters, some more specific promoter fragments retain cell