protocol

Optogenetic interrogation of neural circuits:
technology for probing mammalian brain
structures
Feng Zhang1, 4, Viviana Gradinaru1, 2, 4, Antoine R Adamantidis3, 4, Remy Durand1, Raag D Airan1,
Luis de Lecea3 & Karl Deisseroth1, 3
Department of Bioengineering, 2Program in Neuroscience and 3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 4These
authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to K.D. (deissero@stanford.edu).

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

1

Published online 18 February 2010; doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.226

Elucidation of the neural substrates underlying complex animal behaviors depends on precise activity control tools, as well as
compatible readout methods. Recent developments in optogenetics have addressed this need, opening up new possibilities for
systems neuroscience. Interrogation of even deep neural circuits can be conducted by directly probing the necessity and sufficiency
of defined circuit elements with millisecond-scale, cell type-specific optical perturbations, coupled with suitable readouts such
as electrophysiology, optical circuit dynamics measures and freely moving behavior in mammals. Here we collect in detail our
strategies for delivering microbial opsin genes to deep mammalian brain structures in vivo, along with protocols for integrating the
resulting optical control with compatible readouts (electrophysiological, optical and behavioral). The procedures described here,
from initial virus preparation to systems-level functional readout, can be completed within 4–5 weeks. Together, these methods
may help in providing circuit-level insight into the dynamics underlying complex mammalian behaviors in health and disease.

INTRODUCTION
Understanding the circuit-level functional organization of the
brain will have important implications for both basic and clinical
neuroscience. In particular, we have found that optical manipulation
of activity in neural circuits with light-sensitive rhodopsins, such as
the Chlamydomonas channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2)1,2, Volvox channel­
rhodopsin-1 (VChR1)3, Natronomonas halorhodopsin (NpHR)4
(Fig. 1a) and synthetic rhodopsin/GPCR chimeras5 (optoXRs;
Fig. 1b), may help in illuminating both the normal circuit function
and major disease mechanisms6–19. Here we illustrate the critical
steps we have developed for the implementation of this optogenetic6,7
approach to probe the function of deep brain circuit elements in
mammals. We first review the basic optogenetic control tools we have
described, followed by discussion of optimization of expression, targeting and readout technology. We then present the necessary materials
and outline a detailed series of our experimental protocols for integrating optogenetic neuronal manipulation with in vivo and ex vivo readout
methods, including electrophysiological and optical measures.
Experimental design considerations
Temporally precise genetically encoded control.  Classical neuro­
nal manipulation techniques (electrical, pharmacological and
genetic) either simultaneously affect surrounding cells and processes in addition to the target population or have slow kinetics and
poor reversibility, thereby severely limiting the strength of conclusions that can be drawn. To overcome these spatial and temporal limitations, microbial and chimeric-vertebrate opsin genes
(Table 1) have been developed recently to control highly-defined
electrical (Fig. 1a) and biochemical (Fig. 1b) activity with celltype selectivity, high temporal precision and rapid reversibility. As
most neurons in the brain are not naturally light-sensitive, selective
expression of opsin genes in targeted neural populations makes it
possible to specifically control the activity in these populations,
and the resulting fast on–off kinetics make it possible to evoke or

inhibit neural activity within milliseconds, on a timescale relevant
to the physiological brain functions.
At present, light-activated cation channels from two distinct algal
species, channelrhodopsin-2 from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
(ChR2)1,2,20 and channelrhodopsin-1 from Volvox carteri (VChR1)3
(Fig. 1a, left and middle), have proven to be a powerful pair of tools
for controlling neural activity. ChR2 is maximally activated by blue
light at 470 nm, whereas VChR1 remains significantly light sensitive
even at 589 nm, a wavelength at which (importantly) ChR2 is no
longer responsive (Fig. 1c). Both ChR2 (deactivation time constant
~12 ms) and VChR1 (deactivation time constant ~120 ms) are able
to transduce trains of millisecond-duration light flashes into defined
spike trains up to 30–50 Hz1,2,8. Conversely, the chloride-pumping
halorhodopsin from Natronomonas pharaonis (NpHR) has been
shown to hyperpolarize neurons upon illumination with yellow
light (Fig. 1c). Because of sufficient spectral separation, NpHR and
ChR2 can simultaneously be expressed in the same neurons to enable
bidirectional optical control of neural activity. Moreover, both use
all-trans retinal as the chromophore, which is abundantly present in
mammalian brain tissue, and therefore these optogenetic tools are
fully functional without the addition of chemical cofactors in vivo4.
Optimizing expression and function.  For all of these proteins,
expression issues will determine crucial aspects of performance. For example, because of the inactivation kinetics of ChR2,
higher-expressing cells will be able to follow fast spike frequencies for longer periods of time, as these cells will be able to
employ larger pools of the remaining non-inactivated ChR2. As
another example, without the proper targeting sequences, high
levels of micro­bial protein expression in mammalian cells can
result in the aggregation of misfolded proteins in the Golgi, the
endoplasmic reticulum and other intracellular compartments.
As the conductance of individual rhodopsins is relatively low
nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 439

Figure 1 | Optogenetic tools. (a) Naturally
occurring light-responsive effectors and their
microbial sources: ChR2 from Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii, VChR1 from Volvox carteri and
NpHR from Natronomonas pharaonis; useful
light wavelengths for each are indicated. ChR2
and VChR1 are cation-conducting channels
and NpHR is a chloride pump. (b) Engineered
synthetic rhodopsins for optical control of welldefined intracellular biochemical signaling. The
intracellular loops of bovine rhodopsin have been
replaced with the intracellular loops of G proteincoupled receptors (GPCRs) to yield light-activated
chimeric GPCRs. Green light illumination leads to
activation of the downstream Gq and Gs signaling
pathways. (c) Action spectra. The absorbance
wavelength of the voltage-sensitive dye (VSD)
RH 155 is sufficiently separated from the lightsensitive range of all rhodopsins, therefore
making it possible to integrate VSD imaging with
optogenetic modulation. (d) Viral vectors for
introducing microbial opsin genes into the brain.
Top and middle: Lentiviral and AAV vectors can
be used to deliver a cell-specific promoter along
with the opsin gene and its fluorescent marker.
Bottom: Cre-dependent adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vector carries a doubly floxed inverted
opsin (DIO) fusion gene. Upon transduction
into Cre recombinase-expressing cells, the opsin
fusion gene will be irreversibly inverted and
enable cell-specific gene expression. Part a
was modified with permission from Nature4
(Nature © 2007; Macmillan Publishers Ltd.).

a

470 nm

Na

ChR2

535 nm

+

+

OptoXR

505 nm

–

Na

Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii

c

Cl

ChR2

Volvox
carteri
VChR1

Natronomonas
pharaonis
RH-155

NpHR

1.0

d

LTR

Psi+

or

Gq

Intracellular
Signaling
cPPT
Promoter
(up to 5 kb)

0.8

RRE

0.6

Promoter
ITR (up to 2 kb)

Opsin

XFP

WPRE
LTR

Lentivirus vector
Opsin

XFP

WPRE
polyA ITR

0.4
AAV vector
0.2

lox 2722
ITR EF-1a

0
400

450

(picosiemens or less for ChR2, and even lower for NpHR as a pump, due
to its 1:1 coupling between photon absorption and ion flux), it is
critical to maximize the number of molecules that are properly
integrated into the cytoplasmic membrane, in addition to optimizing transcription of the opsin genes. For this reason, we have
been constructing enhanced versions of halorhodopsin (eNpHR)
by optimizing membrane trafficking sequences to increase the
efficiency of membrane targeting21,22. eNpHR exhibits higher
levels of membrane expression and more robust photocurrents,
and similar modifications could be applied to optimize other
microbial light-activated proteins for enhanced photocurrents.
Molecular engineering is also leading to expanded and refined
function of these microbial proteins by altering spectral proper­ties,
conductance or kinetics. One point mutation (H134R in ChR2
(ref. 23)) has been shown to result in 2–3× enhanced cellular
photocurrents24 (but at the expense of slowed deactivation).
Channelrhodopsin deactivation can be slowed so much that a novel
utility is achieved; several C128 point mutants of ChR2 exhibit
profound bistability, converting a brief pulse of light into a stable
step in membrane potential25. Transduced cells are (at steady state)
responsive to light at >100× lower light levels because of delayed
exit of these proteins from the open state25. These C128 mutants
are still activated by blue (470 nm) light, but photocurrents elicited
by the opening of ChR2(C128A) and ChR2(C128S) can effectively
be terminated by a pulse of green (542 nm) light. These engineered
step function opsins (SFO) can optically sensitize cells to native
patterns of input, by providing a sustained step depolarization of
the target cell membrane potential that can increase excitability.
In many settings this approach will be preferable to simply driving user-defined trains with ­possibly inappropriate spike times.
440 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

b

NpHR

VChR1 589 nm 589 nm

Gs

Relative activation

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

protocol

500

550
600
Wavelength (nm)

650

Opsin XFP

WPRE
polyA ITR

loxP
Cre-dependent AAV vector

Related experimental leverage in terms of more natural control of
native spike timing may also result from use of the optoXRs (Fig. 1;
Table 1), which achieve temporally precise modulation of intra­
cellular biochemical activity rather than direct control of spiking; of
course, in some settings direct control of spike timing is the desired
effect, in which case ChR2 or VChR1 are employed.
Genetic strategies for targeting expression to specific neural
populations.  Opsin genes can be selectively expressed in defined
subsets of neurons in the brain using a variety of expression targeting strategies26–28. Here we focus on those techniques that have
been shown to be effective in achieving functional expression
of optogenic proteins in vivo.
Viral expression systems: unlike many other genetic targeting
strategies requiring the use of transgenic animal models, viral
vectors29 based on lentivirus and adeno-associated virus (AAV) can
be used to target opsin gene expression in a wide range of experimental subjects ranging from rodents to primates. Specifically, high
titer lentivirus and AAV-based vectors (>109 transducing units (TU)
ml − 1 for lentivirus and >1012 genome copies (gc) ml − 1 for AAV vectors) can be easily produced in Biosafety Level 2-certified tissueculture facilities in 1–2 weeks, or alternatively obtained through
a number of virus production facilities (e.g., Viral Vector Core,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA,
and Virapur, LLC., San Diego, California, USA). These transduction
methods have been shown to achieve high levels of functional opsin
gene expression in neurons for several months.
Although most common AAV (Fig. 1d, top) and lentivirus
(Fig. 1d, middle) vectors carry strong ubiquitous or pan-neuronal
promoters, some more specific promoter fragments retain cell

protocol

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

Table 1 | Comparison table of optogenetic tools suitable for fast in vivo use in mammals and other animals.
Wavelength
sensitivity

Mode of
control

Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii

470 nm
(maximum
activation)

Depolarizing

Step function
opsin (SFO)
genes: ChR2
(C128A), ChR2
(C128S), ChR2
(C128T)

Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii

470 nm
Depolarizing
(switching on)
546 nm (switching
off for C128A and
C128S mutants)

Point-mutants of ChR2 with slow or In vitro: dissociated neuron
optically switchable deactivation.
culture25
C128A and C128S mutants show
the most prolonged activation
and the highest light sensitivity,
while C128T retains more temporal
precision of activation SFOs can be
switched on and off with blue and
green light pulses, respectively

VChR1

Volvox carteri

535 nm (maximum Depolarizing
activation)
589 nm
(completely
separable
activation
from ChR2)

Red-shifted action spectrum
relative to ChR2. Similar to ChR2,
VChR1 can be used to drive
reliable action potential firing
over a range of frequencies. With
589 nm light, VChR1 can be
activated independently of ChR2

In vitro: dissociated neuron
culture3

NpHR, eNpHR

Natronomonas
pharaonis

589 nm
(maximum
activation)

Light-activated chloride pump. Can
be used to hyperpolarize neurons
with high temporal precision;
capable of inhibiting single action
potentials within high frequency
spike trains (up to 30 Hz). Also can
be used to mediate sustained inhibition of neurons over many minutes

In vitro: dissociated neuron
culture4,21,22,73 and mouse
brain slice4,22
In vivo: C. elegans (requires
supplementation of ATR)4
and mouse21,22

opto-α1AR

Synthetic

500 nm (maximum Biochemical
activation)

Light-activated GPCR, via
the Gq pathway

In vitro: 293HEK cell line5
In vivo: mouse5

opto-β2AR

Synthetic

500 nm (maximum Biochemical
activation)

Light-activated GPCR, via
the Gs pathway

In vitro: 293HEK cell line5
In vivo: mouse5

Opsin

Host organism

ChR2,
ChR2(H134R),
ChR1/2
chimeras,
fast (ChETA)
mutants

Hyper­
polarizing

type-specificity, allowing selective targeting in animals where
­transgenic technology is not accessible. In addition, viruses are capable of mediating high levels of opsin gene expression by introducing
multiple gene copies into each target cell, an important function for
overcoming the low transcriptional activity of some cell-­specific
promoters. In general for rodent brains, opsin gene expression
reaches functional levels within 3 weeks after AAV injection and
within 2 weeks after lentivirus injection. We have found that to reach
the high steady-state levels of expression in distal axonal processes,
longer periods of expression (>6 weeks) may be necessary.

Modulatory capabilities
Rapid on/off, best used for
precise activation of neurons on the
millisecond timescale. Can be used
to evoke single spikes or defined
trains of action potentials over a
range of frequencies. The H134R
mutation yields larger photocurrents relative to wild-type ChR2,
but with slower koff kinetics.
ChR1/ChR2 chimera mutants78,79
reduce inactivation and ChETA opsins
allow for spiking up to 200 Hz while
also improving overall performance80

Experimental systems
tested
In vitro: dissociated neuron culture1,2,4,80, acute mouse and rat
brain sections2,13,18,33,62–64,78,79,
293HEK cells20
In vivo: C. elegans (requires
supplementation of all-transretinal, ATR)23, D. melanogaster
(requires supplementation
of ATR)65–67,77, zebrafish68,
chicken69, mouse8,9,11,12,14,15,32,49,
rat49, primate70

Electroporation: specific cell types can also be targeted deve­
lopmentally with in utero electroporation24,30, e.g. at precisely timed
embryonic days in mouse to target cortical layers II and III (E15.5), layer
IV (E13.5) or layers V and VI (E12.5). In utero electroporation also can
be used to express opsin genes in the inhibitory neurons of the striatum
or in the hippocampus30,31. In addition, unlike viral delivery methods,
in utero electroporation can be used to deliver DNA of any size, therefore permitting the use of larger promoter segments to achieve higher
cell-type specificity (Table 2). Electroporation also allows high copy
number of genes to be introduced into the target cells.
nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 441

protocol

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

Table 2 | List of cell type-specific expression strategies proven compatible with optogenetics in mammalian tissues.
Method

Cell-types targeted Timing

Pros

Cons

Comments

Transgenic
technology

In principle, any
cell type identifiable via a molecular
marker. A transgenic
construct can be made
by fusing the opsin
gene to the promoter
region of the cell
type-specific marker

6 months to 1 year
for obtaining a stable
transgenic (mouse or
rat) line; marmoset
transgenics also
now possible

Consistent spatial distribution of targeted cells
within each animal in a
given transgenic line
Higher specificity can be
obtained by using bacterial artificial chromosomes
(BACs) to introduce a large
fragment of the promoter
sequence
Relatively uniform levels
of opsin gene expression
across targeted cells in the
targeted population

Endogenous promoters tend to
drive low levels of transgene
expression, often leading to
insufficient levels of opsin
gene expression to mediate
robust optical control
Generation of a transgenic
line is slow and labor intensive
Transgenic technology
is more challenging in
non-murine species

Two transgenic mouse
lines expressing a
microbial opsin gene
have been described
thus far: Thy1ChR2–
EYFP32,33 and
Thy1NpHR–EYFP22

Lentivirus

Cell type-specific
promoters:
  CaMKIIα49,
excitatory
glutamatergic neurons
  SynapsinI4, neuron
specific
  GFAP9, astrocytes
  ppHcrt8, hypocretin
neurons

2 weeks for construction and production
of the recombinant
viral vector, 2 weeks
after injection to
achieve a high
level of opsin
gene expression

Short testing cycle
enables rapid screening
of recombinant promoters
for targeting specific cell
types
Can be pseudotyped with
rabies glycoprotein to gain
retrograde-transduction
properties
Can achieve high levels
of opsin gene expression
by increasing the copy
number of transgene
Expression persists for years

Limited packaging capacity
( <  10 kb total length between
long terminal repeats, LTRs) prevents the use of large promoter
fragments, therefore
compromising specificity
Precision of stereotactic injection
is limited
Variable levels of opsin gene
expression across transduced cells
Small volume of transduction
Some cell type-specific
promoters have weak
expression levels

Lentiviral vectors
have been successfully applied in a
range of mammalian
hosts, ranging from
mice and rats to birds
and monkeys. When
pseudotyped with
VSVg, lentiviral
vectors can effectively transduce all
mammalian neural
tissues

Adenoassociated
virus (AAV)

Cell type-specific
promoters:
  SynapsinI71,
neuron specific
  ppSST56,
SST neurons
  ppMCH72, melanin
concentrating
hormone neurons

2 weeks for construction and production
of the recombinant
viral vector, 3 weeks
after injection to
achieve a high level
of opsin gene
expression

Short testing cycle enables
rapid screen of recombinant
promoters for targeting
specific cell types
Retrograde-transduction
properties possible in
certain serotypes
Can achieve high levels of
opsin gene expression by
increasing the copy number
of transgene
Expression persists for years
Low immunogenicity

Limited packaging capacity
( < 5 kb total length between
LTRs) prevents the use of large
promoter fragments, therefore
compromising specificity
Precision of stereotactic
injection is limited
Variable levels of opsin gene
expression across transduced cells
Moderate volume of transduction
Some cell type-specific
promoters have weak
expression levels

Different AAV serotypes have slightly
different tropism
and transduction
efficiency. For neural
tissue, AAV1, 2, 5,
8, and 9 have been
shown to transduce
neurons in the brain,
but with varying
distribution and
efficiency. The cell
type-specific
tropisms of each
serotype remain to
be fully explored
and compared

Cre-dependent
AAV expression
system

Cell type specificity is
determined by
the choice of Cre
transgenic lines.

3 weeks for construction and production
of the viral vector, 3
weeks after injection
to achieve expression

As with conventional
AAV vectors
High level of cell type
specificity when used
with Cre drivers
Overcomes the low
transcriptional strength
of some cell type-specific
promoters by amplifying
opsin gene expression via
a Cre-dependent strong
promoter74
Leak in absence of Cre
prevented by use of the
doubly floxed inverted
opsin (DIO) system34,10,11,36,74

As with the AAV vector
system

(continued)
442 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

protocol

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

Table 2 | (continued).
Method

Cell-types targeted Timing

Pros

Cons

Comments

Herpes
simplex virus 1
(HSV-1)

Cells can be labeled
based on their
projection targets

~2 months for the
construction of the
expression vector and
production of recombinant viral vectors
1 to 2 weeks to
achieve sufficient
level of opsin gene
expression

Strong and rapid expression
Robust retrograde
transporting property75
Can target specific cell
populations based on
projection target
Can be applied in all
mammalian models
Larger (~150 kb) packaging
capacity than lentivirus
and AAV

More difficult to produce
than lentivirus
More stringent biosafety
precautions than AAV

Commercial HSV
vectors may be
obtained from
Neurovex

For virus-mediated
expression, wait at
least 4 weeks after
injection to allow
accumulation in the
axonal membrane in
the target region

Can used to study specific
neural projections
Not limited to transgenic
mice

Must wait >4 weeks after
viral injection
Cannot discriminate among
fibers with different local
cellular targets, which will
require additional emerging
targeting technologies

Selective
control
of light-sensitive neural
afferents

Axonal projections
coming from a brain
region of interest can
be targeted via focal
injection of virus into
the axon tract origin.
Light-sensitive axon
processes coming
from the site of injection can be activated
at the target region.

Transgenic mice: transgenic technologies can be used to restrict
gene expression to specific subsets of neurons in mice or rats.
Using either short transgene cassettes carrying recombinant
promoters or bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs)-based
trans­genic constructs, microbial opsin genes can be functionally
expressed in subsets of neurons in intact circuits. Several transgenic mouse lines carrying ChR2 under the Thy-1 promoter, that
have proven useful for a wide array of experiments, have been
generated without any noticeable behavioral or reproductive
defects22,32,33.
Conditional expression systems: although cell-specific promoters
are effective at restricting gene expression to subsets of genetically
defined neurons, some promoters have weak transcriptional activity. Therefore when used to direct the expression of microbial opsin
genes, many cell-specific promoters are unable to achieve the level of
opsin gene expression necessary to mediate effective action potential
firing or blockade. To amplify the transcriptional acti­vity in a cellspecific manner, conditional AAV vectors34–36 (Fig. 1d, bottom) have
been developed recently to capitalize on the numerous cell-specific
Cre-driver transgenic mouse lines that have been made available by
individual labs and collective projects such as GENSAT. These conditional AAV expression vectors carry transgene cassettes that are
activated only in the presence of Cre, and the use of strong ubiquitous
promoters to drive the Cre-activated transgene selectively amplifies
opsin gene expression level only in the cells of interest.
Circuit-specific cell targeting based on neuronal projection
patterns: neurons identified by a given genetic marker can still
be quite diverse, either receiving innervations from or sending
axonal projections to distinct brain regions. For example, some
of the tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the midbrain innervate reward-related brain structures
such as the nucleus accumbens, whereas other DA neurons
project to motor control centers such as the striatum, and spatial
separation between different DA neuron populations is not

Other retrograde
possibilities include
pseudorabies virus
and rabies virus
vectors

complete. However, as rhodopsins are trafficked to cellular processes including axons, the axonal processes may become light
sensitive. Therefore, it may be possible to selectively control a
connection-defined neural pathway through focal injection
of viral vectors followed by photostimulation of axon terminals in the target downstream brain structure. For example, to
study the medial prefrontal cortical afferents in the amygdala,
it is possible to inject a viral vector carrying ChR2–enhanced
yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) into the medial prefrontal cortex and implant the stimulation optical fiber into the
amygdala. It is even possible to combinatorially interrogate
the role of multiple subsets of afferent fiber bundles using
multiple optogenetic proteins with distinct spectral sensitivities (e.g., using yellow light to activate VChR1-expressing
afferents independent of ChR2-expressing afferents within the
same neural tissue).
A number of plant and microbial proteins and several viral vectors with unique anterograde- or retrograde-transporting properties28,37,38 may be engineered with recombinases to activate gene
expression in sub-populations of neurons with cell type- and circuit
specificity. For example, expression of fusion proteins containing
Cre and either wheat germ agglutinin or tetanus toxin fragment C
in the cell bodies of one brain region will allow the recombinase to
be trans-neuronally delivered to up- or down-stream neurons in
another brain region. Similarly, viral vectors39,40, such as rabies virus28
or herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) vectors, can be used for retrograde
gene delivery, and the H129 strain76 of HSV might be developed
for anterograde gene delivery. When combined with conditional
expression systems, either Cre-dependent transgenic mice or viral
vectors, this strategy may allow circuit-specific gene expression in a
variety of mammalian animal models not limi­ted to mice. Moreover,
microbial protein expression can also be restricted to specific intracellular compartments and locations by fusing to targeting motifs
and protein domains24,41.
nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 443

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

protocol
Figure 2 | Stereotactic implantation of the cannula guide. (a) After
mounting the animal into the stereotactic frame, a first incision is made
to open the skin above the skull. The skin is gently pulled to the side to
reveal the cranial sutures. (b) After quickly wiping the skull with hydrogen
peroxide, the bregma and the lambda can be easily identified (marked
spots). (c) A thin needle is used to align the skull. (d) A dental drill is
used to create a small craniotomy at the desired location on the skull,
without puncturing the dura. The dura is later removed using fine forceps
to minimize damage to the cortex. (e) A cannula guide is implanted on the
skull through the craniotomy. (f) Metabond and dental cement are used to
secure the cannula guide to the skull. (g) Vetbond and sutures are used to
close the incision around the cannulation site. (h) An internal cannula guide
connected to a pump is inserted through the cannula guide and is used
to infuse virus into the target area in the brain. (i) The animal is allowed
to rest in a recovery cage after surgical implantation. The surgery was
conducted according to established animal care guidelines and protocols at
Stanford University.

Readouts compatible with optogenetic control of intact circuits. 
Several classes of circuit readout can be made compatible with
optogenetic control. First, voltage-sensitive dye (VSD) imaging is
an effective approach for monitoring the electrical activity of large
populations of neurons ex vivo and in vivo with high temporal
resolution. VSDs are lipophilic molecules whose optical absorbance
or emission properties vary depending on the electrical potential
across the membrane42. Along with high-speed cameras to capture
changes in the optical signal, VSD imaging allows researchers to
measure electrical activity changes in neurons on the millisecond
timescale and with micro-scale spatial resolution43–46. Previously,
we have utilized VSDs to image ex vivo and quantify the activity of neural circuits involved in depression-related behaviors47.
VSD imaging can also be combined with optogenetic techniques
to conduct all-optical stimulation and imaging of evoked circuit
responses in brain slices. Optically compatible VSDs such as RH-155
(absorption ~700 nm) are sufficiently separated from the excitation
peaks of ChR2, VChR1 and NpHR48 (Fig. 1c) to permit multimodal
all-­optical stimulation and imaging. The protocol described below
for fast all-optical interrogation has been optimized for brain slices
from Thy1ChR2–YFP transgenic mice32,33.
A second class of readout involves in vivo control integrated
with either or both of electrical recording and behavioral measures. Targeting light-stimulation and electrical-recording devices
to reach the site of opsin gene delivery poses an experimental challenge that can readily be overcome with the appropriate protocol.
We have developed a fiber optic-based optical neural interface
(ONI) that meets this challenge49. The ONI uses stereotactically
implanted (Fig. 2a–i) cannula guides for targeted virus infusion
and light delivery into desired brain structures (Fig. 3a).
Stereotactic targeting of brain structures: stereotactic surgeries can
be used to target opsin gene expression to genetically defined and
spatially restricted neuronal populations in the brain and can also
be used to place a light delivery device to target the transduced
cells using widely available brain atlas coordinates50 as described
below. There are two major methods for stereotactically delivering
lentiviral or AAV vectors to the brain. In the first approach, primarily applicable for in vitro acute slice electrophysiology or imaging
studies, the viral vectors can be injected through a glass needle,
targeted to the brain region of interest via a stereotactic frame; the
use of fine glass needles fabricated from glass capillaries minimizes
the extent of tissue damage. A small diameter Hamilton syringe can
also be used in place of the glass needle; the Hamilton syringe can
444 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

a

b
Lambda

c
Bregma

d

e

f

g

h

i

be mounted onto a micro-pump such as the WPI UltraMicroPump
III, which is directly attached to a stereotactic frame.
The second approach utilizes a stereotactically implanted cannula guide not only to deliver virus but also to direct an optical
fiber to the same brain area of interest (Fig. 3a). In this approach,
the use of a single cannula guide for both viral vector delivery and
optical fiber targeting ensures the co-registration of transduced
brain area and light illumination. The use of cannula guides and
infusion cannulae is a well-suited method for infusion of compounds into specific brain areas. Cannula systems consist of three
major components: cannula guide, injection (or internal) cannula
and dummy cannula. The projection length of each component
can be customized for each component depending on the brain
region of interest. Depending on the experimental application, the
material composition and physical dimensions of each component
can also be varied; e.g., silica instead of steel cannulae are more suitable for integration with magnetic resonance imaging, and larger
diameter cannula guides can be used with bigger rodents such as
rats to accommodate the insertion of a larger diameter optical
fiber to increase the volume of illumination. The cannula guide is
chronically implanted onto the skull of each experimental subject
(Fig. 2h). A dummy cannula (stylet and screw cap) is temporarily
inserted into the cannula guide between experiments to prevent
clogging and infection. During behavioral experiments, an optical fiber can be inserted through the cannula guide to illuminate
the light-sensitive neurons. In addition, bilateral cannula systems
are suitable for targeting multiple brain regions within the same
experimental subject.
Choice of light sources: there are several factors to be considered,
including the intensity of light needed to reliably activate a sufficient volume of tissue and the ability to deliver high frequencies of
light flashes to the experimental sample. For in vivo setups, it is also
important to consider the mechanics and co-registration of the
light delivery with the opsin-expressing brain region. For in vitro
experiments where the tissue sample is manipulated under a microscope, most conventional light sources such as halogen/xenon arc
lamps, LEDs and lasers can be directly coupled to the microscope’s

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

protocol
Figure 3 | Preparation of the optical fiber for in vivo neural control in
mammals. (a) Diagram of the optical neural interface (ONI), consisting
of a stereotactically implanted cannula, an optical fiber, and a solid state
laser controlled by a signal generator. The fiber is prepared with the
appropriate length to illuminate the target brain region. (b) The tools
and parts (fiber with FC connection, dummy cannula, internal cannula,
cannula guide, dental drill, super glue, diamond scribe and fiber stripping
tool) needed to manufacture ONI fibers. (c,d) A drill is used to produce a
small bore on the center of a cannula cap. (e,f) The steel tubing is
removed from an internal cannula. The plastic adapter is used as the fiber
guide. (g) A fiber stripping tool is used to remove the plastic cladding
from a fiber to reveal the fiber core. (h) The bare fiber core is threaded
through the bore on the cannula cap. (i,j) The plastic adapter from the
internal cannula is also placed on the fiber. (k,l) Superglue is applied
to the fiber to secure the plastic adapter against the plastic cladding on
the fiber. The plastic adapter is held tightly against the fiber cladding for
several minutes to allow the superglue to harden. (m) After superglue
has hardened, the fiber is inserted through a cannula guide with the right
projection length for the target brain region. (n) The cannula guide is
securely clipped into the plastic adapter. (o) A diamond scribe is used to
remove the excess fiber from the tip of the cannula guide. (p) The finished
ONI fiber is allowed to protrude from the tip of the cannula guide by
~0.5 mm. Part a was modified with permission7 (Nature © 2007; Macmillan
Publishers Ltd.).

light path. Light flashes can be generated either by a lamp coupled
to a fast shutter (e.g., Lambda DG-4 or Uniblitz shutter) or by
directly modulating the intensity of light output using a waveform
generator (lasers and LEDs; for optimal excitation wavelengths
see Table 1).
For in vivo light delivery in freely moving animals, high power
lasers (~10–15 mW output at the tip of a 100 µm fiber) and LEDs
are most suitable. For superficial stimulation of cortical layers, commercially available small LEDs can also be directly mounted above
the brain over a thinned skull area or cranial glass window15,24. To
target deep brain structures, we have found that thin optical fibers can be used to efficiently transmit sufficient powers of light to
the target area8,49. Optical fibers are versatile elements that can be
fused to recording electrodes (creating an optrode24 as described
below for electrophysiological readout) and coupled to lasers and
LEDs by FC/PC connectors. For mice, up to 300 µm fibers (bare
fiber without plastic cladding) can be used without compromising animal movement, whereas we find that rats can tolerate up to
400 µm fibers. The length of the bare optical fiber can be customized based on the depth of the brain area by removing the precisely
suitable length of plastic cladding. Mammalian brain tissue scatters
light heavily, but ~10% of initial light power density remains at a
distance from the fiber tip of ~500 µm8,49.
To avoid fiber breakage resulting from repeated insertion through
the cannula guide system, a short fiber segment can be permanently
implanted in the target region. During experiments, this short
indwelling fiber segment can be coupled to a longer fiber connected
to the laser by a custom fiber-to-fiber connector (Doric Lenses,
Quebec, Canada). This strategy avoids fiber breakage, minimizes
damage to brain tissue compared with implanted cannulas and
reduces the likelihood of infection due to environmental exposure
through the cannula. However, the fiber connector can lead to up
to 50% loss of transmitted light, which may be overcome with more
powerful laser diodes.
Choice of behavioral subjects: it is important to choose the appropriate species and genetic background according to the behavioral assay. For example, BALB/C animals are more suitable than

a

Optical
fiber
FC/PC
adapter
Laser
controlled by
signal generator

Cannula
guide
Dental
cement
Metabond
Skull
Illumination
Brain

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

k

l

m

n

o

p

C57BL6/J animals for anxiety and depression studies, whereas
C57BL6/J are preferred over BALB/C for locomotor and cognitive
studies51. When using transgenic mouse lines, it is often important
to make sure that the mice are backcrossed (at least for six generations)52 to the appropriate genetic background.
Mechanical design considerations for behavioral equipments:
­during optogenetic behavioral experiments, each animal subject
will have an optical fiber tethered to the skull throughout the
experiment. Therefore, each subject should undergo sufficient
habituation for the behavioral setup. Certain kinds of experimental apparatus containing obstacles such as doors, tunnels or
closed compartments may need to be modified to allow free passage of the optical fiber. In some experiments, the acute insertion
and removal of an optical fiber before and after the behavior test
may be stressful for the experimental subject; therefore, previous
handling will help alleviate this stress. A fiber commutator (Doric
Lenses) may be used to relieve tension in the fiber and provide
more rotational freedom for the experimental animals.
Summary.  We have provided a compact collection of our key
technical insights and protocols for optogenetic targeting of deep
brain structures in mammals, as well as our protocols for major
nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 445

protocol
readout strategies, both in vivo and ex vivo. These methods promise to permit systematic exploration of brain circuits properties
that would otherwise be intractable for this kind of work. Together

these protocols are intended to facilitate the widespread and versatile interrogation of circuit dynamics underlying mammalian
behaviors in health and disease.

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

MATERIALS
Reagents
Virus production: lentiviral plasmids
• Channelrhodopsin vectors
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP-WPRE
• pLenti-Synapsin-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP-WPRE
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-VChR1-EYFP-WPRE
• pLenti-EF1a-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP-WPRE
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-hChR2(H134R)-mCherry-WPRE
• Halorhodopsin vectors
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-eNpHR-EYFP-WPRE
• SFO channelrhodopsin vectors
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-hChR2(C128A)-EYFP-WPRE
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-hChR2(C128S)-EYFP-WPRE
• pLenti-CaMKIIa-hChR2(C128T)-EYFP-WPRE
• Lentivirus support plasmids
• pCMVdeltaR8.74
• pVSVg  CRITICAL These plasmids can be obtained from the Deisseroth
laboratory directly (http://www.optogenetics.org) or from the Deisseroth
plasmid list at Addgene. University-based virus production services,
such as the virus vector cores at the University of North Carolina and
University of Pennsylvania, will accept plasmid DNA and produce
ready-for-injection virus for a fee.
Virus production: mammalian expression vector plasmids for transient
transfection
• Channelrhodopsin vectors
• pcDNA3.1/VChR1-EYFP
• pcDNA3.1/hChR2(H134R)-EYFP
• pcDNA3.1/hChR2(H134R)-mCherry
• OptoXR Vectors
• pcDNA3.1/opto-α1AR-EYFP
• pcDNA3.1/opto-β2AR-EYFP
Virus production: cre-dependent DIO AAV vectors
• pAAV-EF1a-double floxed-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP-WPRE-hGHpA
• pAAV-EF1a-double floxed-eNpHR-EYFP-WPRE-hGHpA  CRITICAL
These plasmids can be obtained directly from the Deisseroth laboratory
(http://www.optogenetics.org) or from the Deisseroth plasmid list at Addgene. University-based virus production services, such as the virus vector
cores at the University of North Carolina and University of Pennsylvania,
will accept plasmid DNA and produce ready-for-injection virus for a fee.
• 293FT cells (Invitrogen, cat. no. R700-07)
• Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen,
cat. no. 12-604Q)
• UltraCULTURE serum-free medium (Lonza, cat. no. 12-725F)
• Penicillin–streptomycin–L-glutamine mixture (Lonza, cat. no. 17-718R)
• Sodium pyruvate solution (Lonza, cat. no. 13-115E)
• Sodium bicarbonate solution (Lonza, cat. no. 17-613E)
• Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) without Ca2 +  and Mg2 +  (Lonza,
cat. no. 17-516F)
• Defined fetal bovine serum (HyClone, cat. no. SH30070.03)
• Sodium butyrate (Sigma, cat. no. 19364-1G)
• HEPES (Sigma, cat. no. 54457-50G-F)
• Sodium phosphate dibasic (Sigma, cat. no. 71636-250G)
• Sodium chloride (Sigma, cat. no. 71376-1KG)
• Hexadimethrine bromide (Sigma, cat. no. 107689-10G)
• Sodium hydroxide (Sigma, cat. no. 71689-500G) ! CAUTION Strong base,
handle and store according to hazardous material protocol.
• Distilled H2O (Lonza, cat. no. 17-724F)
• Calcium chloride 2 M stock solution (Quality Biological, cat. no. 351-130-061)
Stereotactic injection and cannula implantation
• Anesthetics (Mice: Ketamine 80 mg kg − 1 and Xylazine 12 mg kg − 1; Sigma,
cat. no. K113; Rats: 80 mg kg − 1 and Xylazine 6 mg kg − 1, Sigma, cat. no.
K4138). Alternatively, isoflurane may also be used. ! CAUTION Ketamine is a
controlled substance and should be handled according to relevant rules of
446 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

the host institutions. Isoflurane is a highly volatile substance and a proper
fume hood and ventilation device should be used.
• Analgesics (Rats: Buprenorphine 0.01–0.05 mg kg − 1; Mice: Buprenorphine
0.05–0.1 mg kg − 1 subcutaneous, Sigma, cat. no. B9275) ! CAUTION
Buprenorphine is a controlled substance and should be handled according
to relevant rules of the host institutions.
• Lubricant eye ointment (Pharmaderm, cat. no. NDC 0462-0211-38)
• Sterile PBS (PBS 10×, Gibco, cat. no. 70011)
• Ethanol (Sigma, cat. no. 459836) ! CAUTION Ethanol is flammable. Avoid
exposure to ignition.
• Hydrogen peroxide 30% (Sigma, cat. no. 31642)
• C&B metabond (Parkell, cat. no. IS380)
• Dental cement (Stoelting, cat. no. 51459)
• Tissue adhesive (Fisher, cat. no. NC9259532)
• Paraffin oil (Fisher, cat. no. BP26291)
• Betadine (PurduePharma, cat. no. a8658)
• 8-week old C57BL/6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory, cat. no. 000664)
! CAUTION All experiments using animals should be carried out under
institutional and national guidelines.
VSD imaging
• D( + )-Sucrose (Fluka, cat. no. 8410026)
• D( + )-Glucose (Sigma, cat. no. S6297)
• NaCl (EMD Chemicals, cat. no. SX0420-1)
• KCl (Fluka, cat. no. 60128)
• NaH2PO4 (Fluka, cat. no. 74196)
• NaHCO3 (Sigma, cat. no. S6297)
• 2 M CaCl2 stock solution (Quality Biological, cat. no. 351-130-061)
• 2 M MgCl2 stock solution (Quality Biological, cat. no. 340-034-061)
• RH 155 (AnaSpec, cat. no. 84726)
• Agarose (Invitrogen, cat. no. 16500100)
• Super Glue (Duro, cat. no. SUP-1)
Equipment
Virus production
• 0.45 µm Low-protein binding filter flask (Millipore, cat. no. SCHVU02RE)
• T-75 and T-225 tissue culture flasks (Nunc, cat. nos. 156499 and 159934)
• Four-layer cell factory culture flask (Nunc, cat. no. 140004)
• Ultracentrifuge tubes (Beckman Coulter, cat. no. 344058)
• Beckman Coulter Allegra X-12 bench-top centrifuge (Beckman Coulter)
• Beckman Coulter L-100 K preparative ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter)
• Beckman Coulter SW-28 ultracentrifuge rotor (Beckman Coulter)
Stereotactic injection and cannula implantation
• Surgical tools including scissors, forceps and scalpel blades (Fine Science Tools)
• Small animal stereotactic frame (Kopf Instruments, cat. no. 922 for mice,
cat. no. 955 for rat) with cannula holder (Kopf Instruments cat. no. 1766-AP)
• Programmable microsyringe pump (WPI, cat. no. SP220I)
• 10 µl Hamilton microsyringe (WPI, cat. no. nanofil) and tubing
(Intramedic, cat. no. 4705)
• Cannula guide for 200 µm fiber in mice (PlasticsOne, cat. no. C313GS5/SPC) internal/injector cannula (PlasticsOne, cat. no. C313IS-5/SPC) and
dummy cannula (PlasticsOne, cat. no. C313DCS-5/SPC). The length of the
cannula guide and internal cannula can be customized for desired target
depth (recommended length for the cannula guide is 0.5 mm above the
target region; internal cannula should have a projection length of 0.5 mm
beyond the cannula guide tip; dummy cannula should be flush with the
tip of the cannula guide).
• Dissection stereomicroscope (1–×10) with stand (Leica MZ6, cat. no.
10445614)
• Cotton swabs (Puritan Medical Products, cat. no. 25-806 10WC)
• High-speed micro drill with charger (Fine Science Tools, cat. no. 18000-17)
• 0.5 mm Micro drill stainless steel burrs (Fine Science Tools, cat. no.
19007-05)
• 0.9 mm Micro drill stainless steel burrs (Fine Science Tools, cat. no.
19007-05)

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

protocol
• 1 ml Syringes with subcutaneous needles (VWR, cat. no. 82002-326)
• Surgical suture (Myco Medical, cat. no. SK7772)
• Heating blanket (Fine Science Tools, cat. no. 21061 or 21060)
• Epoxy glue (Fisher, cat. no. NC9863515)
Optrode (integrated fiber-electrode) recording
• 473 nm diode laser (Cryst Laser, cat. no. BCL-473-050; 50mW, 473nm,
TEMoo CW laser with TTL on/off, analog output intensity modulation, PC
connector at laser output)
• Optical fiber (ThorLabs, cat. no. BFL37-200 for 200 µm fiber; cat. no.
BFL37-300 for 300 µm fiber; fibers need to have a FC end to connect to the
PC adapter on the output of the laser; length can be specified depending
on the experimental setup; recommended to have at least 1 m of slack fiber
from the head of the animal to the first fiber fixture).
• Fiber stripping tool (300 µm fiber: ThorLabs, cat. no. T18S31; 200 µm fiber:
ThorLabs, cat. no. T12S25)
• Electrodes, tungsten, 1 mΩ, ~125 µm (AM systems, cat. no. 573220)
• Electrode holder (Kopf Instruments, cat. no. 1774)
• Amplifier (AM systems, model 1800 2-channel microelectrode AC amplifier,
cat. no. 700,000)
• Data recording system (Axon Instruments/Molecular Devices Digidata
1440A or previous Digidata 1320 series, with pCLAMP 10 software)
In vivo optical stimulation for behavioral studies
• Arbitrary waveform generator, lasers and optical fiber (Agilent,
cat. no. 33220A)
• Light power meter (ThorLabs, sensor, cat. no. S130A, and digital console,
cat. no. PM100D)
• Dust cap (PlasticsOne, cat. no. 303DC/1)
• Custom-made aluminum rotating optical commutator (Doric Lenses)
• Thy1ChR2–EYFP line 18 transgenic mice (The Jackson Laboratory,
cat. no. 007612) ! CAUTION all experiments using animals should be carried
out under institutional and national guidelines.
VSD imaging
• Olympus BX51W upright microscope (Olympus)
• ×4 Objective (Olympus XL Fluoro ×4/340 objective, 0.28 NA, Olympus)
• Stable light source for VSD illumination (Olympus, cat. no. TH4-100)
• VSD imaging filter cube in Olympus filter housing (Chroma Technologies,
emission filter, cat. no. D710/40; dichroic mirror, cat. no. 665DCXXR)
• Slice perfusion chamber (Siskiyou, cat. no. PC-V)
• High-speed CCD camera and processor with preconfigured Dell Optiplex
755 (SciMedia, cat. no. MiCAM02)
• Ultra-fast optical filter switcher and light source for providing optical
stimulation (Sutter Instruments, cat. no. Lambda DG-4)
• Excitation filters (Semrock, ChR2, cat. no. FF01-470/22-25, NpHR,
cat. no. FF01-593/40-25)
• Cell strainers (BD Falcon, cat. no. 352360)
• Illumination filter for RH155 imaging (Chroma Technologies,
cat. no. D710/40)
• Slice anchor (Warner Instruments, cat. no. SHD-26H/2)
• Waveform generator (Agilent Technologies, cat. no. 3320A)
• 2-Channel peristaltic pump (Rainin, RP-1 pump, cat. no. 7103-052)
• Tygon Tubing 1/16′′ I.D. 1/8′′ O.D. and 1/32′′ wall (US Plastics, cat. no. 57102)
• Connectors for tubing (Harvard Apparatus, cat. no. 721410)
• Coaxial cables
• Dissection tools (Fine Science Tools)
• Vacuum centrifuge for evaporation of solvents used in preparation of dye
aliquots (Savant DNA Speed Vacuum)
• Vibrating slice cutter (Leica Microsystems, cat. no. VT 1000S)
• Table-top laboratory animal anesthesia system (VetEquip, cat. no. 901806)

• Blades (Fine Science Tools, cat. no. 10050-00)
• 95% Oxygen/5% CO2 (Praxair, cat. no. OXM)
• Shutter (Uniblitz, cat. no. Vmm-D1)
• Air table (Newport)
• Microscope-fixed stage (Sutter Instruments, cat. no. MT-1000/Y51)
• Crystallizing dishes for slice recovery (VWR, cat. no. 89000/290)
• 50 and 1,000 ml beakers (Corning, cat. nos. 1000-50 and 1000-1L)
• 1.5 ml Microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, cat. no. 022364111)
• 10 cm Petri dish (BD, cat. no. 351005)
• Parafilm M (VWR, cat. no. 52858-000)
Reagent Setup
Virus injection setup  Fill the syringe, the tubing and the glass needle or injection cannula with paraffin oil. Load the virus solution in the needle or injection
cannula using the programmable microsyringe pump.
D-10 cell maintenance medium  Prepare 500 ml of D-10 medium by
supplementing 500 ml of DMEM with 50 ml of fetal bovine serum, 5 ml of
penicillin–streptomycin–L-glutamine mixture, 5 ml of sodium pyruvate
and 5 ml of sodium bicarbonate. The final mixture can be stored at 4 °C for
1 month.
Virus production medium  Prepare serum-free virus production medium
by supplementing 500 ml of UltraCULTURE with 5 ml of penicillin–streptomycin–L-glutamine mixture, 5 ml of sodium pyruvate and 5 ml of sodium
bicarbonate. The final mixture can be stored at 4 °C for 1 month.
20% Sucrose solution  Prepare 10 g of sucrose and then add PBS to a final
volume of 50 ml. Filter using 0.22 µm filter and then store at 4 °C for up to
1 month.
2× HBS buffer  To 450 ml of distilled H2O, add 5.96 g of HEPES (50 mM),
0.106 g of Na2HPO4 (1.5 mM) and 8.18 g of NaCl (280 mM). The pH should
initially be ~5.8. Titrate with NaOH to 7.05 (use 5 M NaOH first and then switch
to 1 M NaOH). Bring the final volume to 500 ml and then filter with 0.22 µm
filter. The solution is stable at room temperature (RT, 22 °C) for 6 months.
Cutting solution  In ddH2O add 120 mM sucrose, 64 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM
KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 25 mM NaHCO3 and 10 mM glucose. Store at 15 °C.
Remains fresh for 2 weeks.
Artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF), 10× stock solution  In ddH2O add
124 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 26 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM
glucose, 2.4 mM CaCl2 and 1.3 mM MgCl2.  CRITICAL The solution must
be freshly prepared.
Preparation of dye aliquots  Dilute 25 mg powder (MW: 950.3 g mol − 1) in
5 ml ethanol and aliquot into ten 0.5 ml aliquots (5 mg ml − 1) in 1.5 ml
microcentrifuge tubes. Evaporate the solvent from aliquots by centrifuging
it in a vacuum centrifuge until dry (~30 min, drying rate: medium, no heat).
Each aliquot will contain 2.5 mg of RH 155 dye. Dried aliquots may be
stored at 0 °C for up to 1 year.
Preparation of slice staining solution  On the day of experiment, transfer
2.5 mg of RH 155 dye into 25 ml of ACSF to yield a final concentration of
0.1 mg ml − 1. Minimize the exposure to light with aluminum foil wrapping
and store at RT. Equilibrate the solution with 95% CO2/5% O2.
Agarose blocks for slicing  Prepare 1% agarose solution by adding 1 g of
agarose into 100 ml of distilled water. Heat the agarose/water mixture in a
microwave until agarose has completely dissolved (~1 min at high heat).
Cool to 50 °C and then pour the agarose solution into 10 cm petri dishes
(~50 ml per petri dish). After the agarose has solidified, wrap the plates with
parafilm to avoid evaporation and store at 4 °C for up to 6 months. On the
day of experiment, cut the block large enough to support brain samples
(1 cm × 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm).

PROCEDURE
Production of recombinant lentivectors for optogenetic gene delivery in mammals
1|	 Cell preparation  Aspirate the growth medium from one 95% confluent T-225 flask of 293FT cells. Gently rock the flask
to ensure complete coverage of the cell monolayer and incubate at room temperature for 5 min or until all of the cells
have detached. Add 5 ml of D-10 to the flask to neutralize trypsin present in the medium and pipette three times to break up
any cell clumps.
nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 447

protocol
 CRITICAL STEP It is important to use low passage 293FT cells for the production of viruses. To make sure that the cells
are always in the fastest growth phase, never let the cells approach full confluence.
2|	 Split the 10 ml of cell suspension into four new T-225 flasks. Add 30 ml of fresh room temperature D-10 to each flask.
Gently rock the flasks to ensure that the cells are evenly distributed in the flask. Put all four flasks into a 37 °C CO2
incubator for 2 d or until 95% confluent.

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

3|	 Harvest the cells from each of four 95% confluent T-225 flasks of 293FT cells as described in Step 1. Transfer all the
cells into 500 ml of room temperature D-10 medium, mix, and place the cell and medium mixture into one four-layer cell
factory. Transfer the cell factory to a 37 °C CO2 incubator for 24 h.
4|	 Transfection of cell factory  In a 50 ml conical tube, prepare the following mixture: 690 µg of lentivirus plasmid
(e.g., pLECYT and pFCK-hChR2-mCherry), 690 µg of pCMVdeltaR8.74, 460 µg of pVSVg and 5.7 ml of 2 M CaCl2 solution.
Mix gently and bring the total volume to 23.75 ml with distilled H2O. Mix thoroughly.
5|	 Add 23.75 ml of 2× HBS to the DNA–CaCl2 mixture. Mix thoroughly and quickly. Then transfer directly into 500 ml of
room temperature D-10.
 CRITICAL STEP Mix the DNA–CaCl2 with 2× HBS quickly and then transfer to room temperature D-10 immediately.
Short but thorough mixing ensures efficient formation of small calcium phosphate precipitates.
6|	 Remove the old medium from the four-layer cell factory and replace with the D-10 containing the calcium phosphate
transfection mix. Transfer the plate back to the incubator for 15 h.
7|	 Remove the transfection medium from the cell factory and gently wash using 200 ml of fresh D-10. Add 400 ml of
fresh room temperature D-10 to the cell factory. Put cells back into incubator for 8 h.
! CAUTION The medium from the cell factory may contain recombinant viral vectors. Apply bleach to the medium to
decontaminate.
8|	 At 24 h post transfection, remove medium from the cell factory and replace with 200 ml of Virus Production Medium
supplemented with 5 mM Na butyrate. Return the cell factory into the incubator.
 CRITICAL STEP Cells are easily detached at this stage and should be handled gently.
! CAUTION The medium from the cell factory may contain recombinant viral vectors. Apply bleach to the medium to
decontaminate.
9|	 Virus harvest  Treat six ultracentrifuge tubes by spraying with ethanol and air-drying in the tissue culture
hood.
10| At 48 h post transfection, collect the virus containing supernatant into four 50 ml conical tubes and centrifuge for
5 min at 500×g.
11| Prewash a low-protein binding 0.45 µm filter flask with 30 ml of D10 medium, then filter the virus-containing
supernatant.
12| Divide the filtered virus-containing supernatant among the six centrifuge tubes.
13| Pipette 2 ml of 20% sucrose solution to the bottom of the centrifuge tube.
 CRITICAL STEP It is important to pipette slowly so that the sucrose solution forms a discrete layer.
14| Centrifuge in a Beckman SW-28 rotor for 2 h at 82,700g at 4 °C.
15| Gently carry the centrifuge tubes back to the tissue culture hood and pour out the supernatant. There should be a
tiny semi-transparent pellet at the bottom of each tube that resembles a soft contact lens. Dry the side of each tube with
Kimwipe.
! CAUTION Supernatant may contain trace virus. Apply bleach to the medium to decontaminate.

448 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

protocol
16| Add 100 µl of cold PBS to the first tube and resuspend the pellet by swirling and gentle pipetting.
 CRITICAL STEP Excessive pipetting will degrade the virus.
17| Transfer the medium from the first centrifuge tube into the next tube to resuspend the second pellet. Repeat for the
four additional tubes.

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

18| Pipette the virus solution into an Eppendorf tube and spin the solution at 1,000g for 5 min to remove unsuspended
virus debris. Centrifugation can be carried out at either room temperature or 4 °C.
19| Aliquot the supernatant and store at  − 80 °C for up to 1 year.
 PAUSE POINT The supernatant can be stored at  − 80 °C for up to 1 year.
Stereotactic injection and cannula placement into the rodent brain (Fig. 2)
20| Animal preparation.  C57BL/6 mice (15–30 g) or Fisher rats (~200–300 g) should be housed and handled according
to institutional and national guidelines.
21| Ensure that all surgical tools are clean and sterile. Disinfect the area with 70% ethanol and sterilize all tools by
autoclaving or immersion in a disinfectant.
 CRITICAL STEP Perform all the surgeries under aseptic conditions.
22| Anesthetize rodents using 1.5% isoflurane (for surgeries longer than 1 h) or i.p. injection (90 mg kg − 1 ketamine and
5 mg kg − 1 xylazine for rats; 80 mg kg-1 and 15–20 mg kg − 1, respectively, for mice).
 CRITICAL STEP Check for the absence of toe-pinch reflex. Dispose of excess anesthesia according to institutional
regulations.
? TROUBLESHOOTING
23| Apply ophthalmic ointment to prevent eye drying.
24| Use a heating pad to maintain the body temperature at 35 °C.
25| Place the animal in a stereotactic frame. Fix the first ear (or head) bar and appose the animal’s ear canal to the
ear bar by applying moderate pressure; place the second ear bar in the opposite ear while gently holding the animal;
insert the mouth holder between the jaws of the animal; and finally, attach the nose holder to the animal using low
pressure.
 CRITICAL STEP Correct head position in the stereotactic frame allows tilt, but no lateral movement of the head.
26| Shave and clean the head, wipe with 70% ethanol and betadine.
27| Inject saline solution subcutaneously to prevent dehydration during surgery (30 ml kg − 1 of body weight: ~0.5 ml for
adult mouse and ~5.0 ml for adult rat).
28| Make a midline scalp incision of ~1 cm using scalpel. Gently pull the skin aside to expose the skull (Fig. 2a). Clean the
skull with cotton swabs immersed in hydrogen peroxide.
 CRITICAL STEP The thin membranes covering the skull will be disrupted immediately upon exposure to hydrogen peroxide
and will appear as a layer of white foam. Stop the reaction with PBS immediately after the application of hydrogen peroxide
by wiping with a cotton swab soaked in PBS and remove debris with a scalpel blade.
29| After cleaning the skull with cotton swabs, identify the bregma (the point of intersection of the sagittal suture with the
curve of best fit along the coronal suture) and the lambda (midpoint of the curve of best fit along the lambdoid suture)53
(Fig. 2b).
 CRITICAL STEP Align the bregma and the lambda to the same dorsal–ventral (or z) coordinates by adjusting the height of
the nose clamp on the stereotactic frame until the head is flat. Align the x and y tilt of the animal’s head by measuring the x
and y coordinates of the bregma and the lambda.
30| Use a brain atlas to identify the coordinates for the target structure.

nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 449

protocol
31| Move to the targeted area defined by the coordinates (Fig. 2c). Slowly make a small craniotomy (slightly larger
diameter than the cannula guide) using a drill mounted on the stereotactic frame (Fig. 2d).
 CRITICAL STEP To minimize damage to the brain, do not drill through the dura and instead use fine forceps to remove
the dura. This is crucial for cortical injections.
? TROUBLESHOOTING

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

32| Thaw the virus on ice. Lentivirus can be kept on ice for 6 h without significantly affecting the titer, whereas AAV can
be stored at temperatures as warm as 4 °C for at least 1 month without the loss of significant titer.
33| Place the cannula in the cannula holder on stereotactic frame and slowly lower the cannula guide into the brain.
? TROUBLESHOOTING
34| Dry the skull with cotton swabs. Apply a thin layer of C&B Metabond where the dental cement will be in contact with
the skull, including around the cannula pedestal.
35| Once the C&B Metabond hardens, release the cannula from the holder and withdraw the cannula holder without
moving the cannula guide (Fig. 2e). Secure the cannula pedestal with dental cement and ensure that at least two rounds
of threads in the cannula pedestal are exposed (Fig. 2f).
36| Glue the skin back with Vetbond surgical adhesive (Fig. 2g).
37| Perform virus injection during surgery (A) or after surgery (B). It may be necessary to titrate the virus (Box 1).
(A) Virus injection during surgery (We describe here our protocol using the micropump from WPI and with special
attention on the surgical procedure and cannula implantation for virus injection into rodent brain. Virus can also be
delivered using glass capillaries to minimize tissue damage54.)
	 (i) Inject 0.2–0.5 µl of virus into the brain using a 10 µl microsyringe and a thin 34 G metal needle.
	 (ii) Control the injection volume and flow rate (0.1 µl min − 1) with a high precision injection pump (Fig. 2h).
	 (iii) After injection leave the needle in place for 10 additional min to allow the virus to diffuse in the brain.
Withdraw the needle slowly afterwards.
	 (iv) After completely withdrawing the needle check that it is not clogged by pumping out a small droplet (0.1 µl).
(B) Virus injection after surgery
	 (i) Carry out this procedure after the dental cement is dry, while the animal is still anesthetized.
	 (ii) Use an internal cannula fitted to the cannula guide’s length (Fig. 2i).
	 (iii) Connect the internal/injector cannula to the tubing filled with oil (which is connected to the microsyringe), load it
with virus solution and place it into the cannula guide.
	 (iv) Infuse the virus at a very low rate (0.1 µl min − 1) as described above.
? TROUBLESHOOTING
38| Give buprenorphine (0.03 mg kg − 1) subcutaneously following the surgical procedure to minimize pain/discomfort.
39| Let the animal fully recover in a clean cage placed over a heating blanket (Fig. 2i). Monitor the recovery of the
animal every 10 min.
40| Simultaneous optical stimulation and electrical recording in living mice with the optrode method 
Prepare the optrode by firmly attaching an extracellular tungsten electrode (1 mΩ, ~125 µm) to an optical fiber
(~200 µm) (TIMING 10 min).
 CRITICAL STEP The tip of the electrode must be deeper (>0.3mm) than the tip of the fiber to ensure illumination of the
recorded neurons and prevent artifacts24.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not contact the tip of the electrode.

Box
 
1 |  CRITICAL STEP VIRUS injection and validation
1. It is important to quantitatively validate the targeting of virus injection.
2. It is recommended to perform several injections with increasing volumes of virus at the same concentration.
3. Start at 0.2 µl per injection site with 0.2 µl increments up to 1 µl final injection volume.
4. Assess spatial extent, efficacy and specificity of transduction by histological analysis.

450 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

protocol
41| Prepare animals by performing craniotomies (A) or use animals that have a cannula implanted in the desired region (B).
! CAUTION All experiments using animals should be carried out under institutional and national guidelines.
(A) New craniotomy above target region
	 (i) Prepare the animal as described in Steps 20–31, in a stereotactic frame on an optics table.
 CRITICAL STEP Use a Faraday cage to shield out electrical noise.
(B) Existing cannula above target region
	 (i) Anesthetize the animal as described in Steps 22–24.
	 (ii) Place animal in stereotactic frame (Step 25) so that the cannula is vertically aligned.

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

42| Use an electrode holder to mount the optrode (or optrodes for more than one location) on the stereotactic frame.
43| Lower the optrode to the desired depth through the freshly made craniotomies or through the cannula.
 CRITICAL STEP Take all precautions not to damage the electrode tip. Avoid touching the skull or the cannula directly
with the electrode tip; once the tip is safely inside the cannula it will not get damaged as it is lowered further.
44| Attach a ground wire to the scalp as a reference signal.
45| Connect the optical fiber to a laser diode of desired wavelength and the electrode to an amplifier. For single unit
recordings the recorded signal is band pass filtered between 300 Hz and 5 kHz. For field potentials, low-pass filter the signal
at 300 Hz.
46| Use an ADC board (e.g., Digidata) and control software (e.g., pClamp) to collect data and generate light pulses through
the fiber.
? TROUBLESHOOTING
47| If desired, sacrifice the animal immediately after recording. The brain may be extracted and sectioned to verify
opsin gene expression and accurate placement of the optrode or acute slices can be prepared for electrophysiology
or VSDI.
Setting up optical stimulation for behavioral assays
48| Preparation of ONI fibers (Fig. 3).  Prepare the ONI fiber using cannula parts from PlasticsOne. These consist of a
screwing cap for securing the fiber to the animal’s head, a fiber guard from the internal cannula adapter and a bare fiber
with length customized based on the depth of the target region. Prepare the screwing cap by drilling a ~2 mm diameter
hole centrally on the top of a dust cap to allow the optical fiber to pass through (Fig. 3c,d).
49| Remove the metal tubing from the plastic pedestal of an internal cannula (Fig. 3e,f).
50| Use a fiber stripping tool to remove ~40 mm of plastic coating from the bare end of an optical fiber (Fig. 3g).
51| Thread the fiber through the cap with the cap opening facing away from the FC connector on the fiber (Fig. 3h).
Thread the fiber through the plastic pedestal so that the snap-on part faces away from the FC connector on the fiber
(Fig. 3i).
52| Apply a very thin layer of glue to the interface of coated/uncoated fiber and slide the plastic pedestal onto the fiber
so it is tight against the plastic coating on the fiber (Fig. 3j–l). Allow the glue to dry for 10 min.
 CRITICAL STEP Do not apply excess glue. Too much glue will set slowly, prevent the cap from fitting over the internal
cannula and also prevent the internal cannula from snapping onto the cannula guide.
53| Insert the ONI fiber through a cannula guide (same dimensions as the ones implanted on the experimental animals)
and ensure that the components snap tightly (Fig. 3m,n). Use a diamond knife to cut the fiber so that it projects 0.5 mm
from the tip of the cannula guide (Fig. 3o,p). It is not necessary to polish the fiber end.
 CRITICAL STEP It is important to use a diamond knife so the fiber tip is flat to ensure consistent illumination.
After cutting, check the fiber tip under a stereomicroscope.
54| Connect the FC end of the fiber to the PC connector on the output port of the laser. Connect the laser control box to
a waveform generator.
nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 451

protocol
55| Program the waveform generator with the desired stimulation protocol (i.e., pulse frequency, duration and intensity).
 CRITICAL STEP Use a power meter to measure the light output at the end of the fiber before and after behavioral testing.

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

56| In vivo stimulation for behavior.  Insert the ONI fiber through the cannula guide on the animal’s head and tighten the
screw cap to secure the fiber.
 CRITICAL STEP Extra care should be taken during fiber insertion to prevent breakage.
 CRITICAL STEP For most behaviors, it is necessary to habituate the animals to the experimental setup by practicing
fiber insertion/removal several times. The animals should be placed in the behavioral testing room for at least 3 h before
behavioral testing.
? TROUBLESHOOTING
57| Begin behavioral testing. Stimulation can be applied by triggering the waveform generator.
58| Verify the cannula placement and opsin gene expression by post-behavioral histological analysis.
All-optical stimulation and activity imaging in slices using VSD
59| Optics setup  On an upright microscope, set up the stimulation light source (e.g., DG-4) to interfere with the epifluorescence port. The light source or a shutter needs to be in place to allow precisely timed flashes of stimulation light.
60| Set up the VSD filters by placing the imaging filter cube carrying both the dichroic (reflect  < 665 nm light to the tissue
sample) and emission filter (710 nm bandpass).
61| Connect the halogen lamp to the diascopic lamphouse port and use this light source for illumination of RH 155-stained
slices. Place the illumination filter (710 nm) into a slot in the condenser. This filter isolates 710 nm light from the diascopic
lamphouse for illumination of RH 155-stained slices. RH 155 is an absorbance dye; the filter placed in the condenser filters
the light coming from the bright field light source below the tissue sample, and the amount of transmittance reflects the
changes in membrane voltage.
62| Staining in RH 155 dye  Prepare acute brain sections from the brain region of interest55. While the slices are recovering
in cutting solution with perfusion of CO2/O2, prepare fresh ACSF solution.
 CRITICAL STEP Make sure that the pH of the ACSF is between 7.3 and 7.4. Perfuse the ACSF with 95% CO2/5% O2 for
10 min before using.
63| Dilute one aliquot of RH 155 dye with 25 ml ACSF to prepare staining solution. The solution should appear dark
blue in color.
 CRITICAL STEP It is important to minimize light exposure to the dye. Wrap aluminum foil around all dye containers
and keep all the dye solutions in the dark.
64| Equilibrate the staining solution in 95%O2/5%CO2 at room temperature (25 °C) for 10 min.
 CRITICAL STEP Wrap foil around staining container and keep in dark.
65| Quickly transfer the slices from the water bath to the staining solution and incubate the slices in the dark for three
hours while bubbling with 95%O2/5%CO2.
 CRITICAL STEP Place slices flat and spaced evenly, completely immersed in solution. Minimize light exposure by
wrapping containers in foil and staining in darkness. Consistent timing, dye concentration and staining area are crucial.
66| Setting up the sample and optimizing the image  Transfer the slices in the cell strainer from the staining solution
to fresh, ACSF equilibrated with 95% O2/5% CO2 to wash away excess dye. Incubate the slices in the fresh ACSF for 15 min.
While the slices are recovering, perfuse the slice chamber on the microscope with equilibrated ACSF. The slices should be
evenly stained dark blue.
67| Transfer a single stained slice from the cell strainer into the slice chamber on the microscope stage. Continue to perfuse
the chamber with 95% O2/5% CO2 ACSF.
68| Ensure slice stability by placing a slice anchor around the edges of the slice. Ensure Lycra strings from the slice anchor
do not cover the region of interest.

452 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

protocol
69| Adjust the slice to place it in the center of the field of the view and adjust intensity of excitation light
(from halogen light source) to enhance contrast while minimizing camera saturation.
 CRITICAL STEP Ensure 100% of the illumination light is directed to the camera. After positioning the slice, close the
shutter for the halogen light source to minimize photobleaching. All imaging sessions should be carried out in the dark
to minimize noise and photobleaching.

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

70| Stimulation and image acquisition  Bear in mind that perfusion of ACSF during image acquisition can introduce
motion artifacts. The camera can be set to trigger the function generator and DG-4, if desired. It is also recommended to
­simultaneously record light-evoked field potentials and to validate the effectiveness of optical stimulation, slice health and
proper configuration of the VSDI setup. Process images using MATLAB.
● TIMING
Steps 1–3, Preparation of cells for transfection: 2 d
Steps 4–8, Transfection and culturing of cells to produce lentivirus: 39 h
Steps 9–19, Harvesting, concentration and aliquoting of lentivirus: 4 h
Steps 20–39, Stereotactic injection of virus in rodents: 1–2 h. At least 2 weeks are required after injection before sufficient
levels of opsin gene products are expressed in the brain.
Steps 40–47, Simultaneous optical stimulation and electrical recording in vivo: 2–3 h
Steps 48–58, Behavioral testing with in vivo optical stimulation: 2 or more hours depending on the specific behavioral
experiment
Steps 59–61, Setting up optics for VSD imaging: 1 h
Steps 62–65, Staining brain sections with VSD: 3 h
Steps 66–69, Setting up samples for imaging and optimizing the settings: 30 min
Step 70, Acquiring VSDI images: 30 min
? TROUBLESHOOTING
Troubleshooting advice can be found in Table 3.
Table 3 | Troubleshooting table.
Step

Problem

22

Incomplete anesthesia: persis­ High tolerance or clearance
tent response to toe pinch

Administer additional 10% volume ketamine/xylazine
(or corresponding isoflurane increment)

31

Poor cannula positioning
observed during histological
validation

Stereotactic coordinates based on
brain atlas are not accurate for the
experimental animal age or strain

Tune the co-ordinates for age and species

Excess bleeding after
craniotomy

Vessel trauma

Place cotton swab over craniotomy site. When hemostasis
is achieved, irrigate craniotomy site with sterile saline

33

Excess bleeding after
cannula placement

Vessel trauma

Place cotton swab over craniotomy site. When hemostasis
is achieved, irrigate the site with sterile saline

37

No solution can be
injected

Needles may clog after advancement
through intact tissue

Replace the needle

46

No electrical signal is
recorded

Sensitive electrode tip has been
damaged by contact

After confirming integrity of electrical connections,
replace electrode

Electrical noise observed
during recording

Ground loop present in the setup

Check all converging grounds to the table and the table
ground to the amplifier. Confirm that the ground wire is
in contact with the tissue and provide ~30–50 µl saline
to the ground wire to ensure electrical connectivity

Optical stimulation does
not modulate physiology

Opsin-expressing cells may be
distant from recording electrode

Calculate relevant scattering parameters (accounting for
light wavelength, intensity and source geometry) in the
context of local neuroanatomy. Optrode may need to be
redesigned accordingly or optrode positioning may need
to be revised by complete retraction and replacement

Fiber breakage during
behavior

Rotational behavior results in
fiber torsion

Employ fiberoptic commutator to relieve torsion; some
light loss may result

56

Possible reason

Solution

nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 453

protocol
ANTICIPATED RESULTS
Both lentiviral and AAV vectors carrying an appropriate cell-specific promoter and the opsin gene of interest can
mediate robust expression in targeted cell types (Fig. 4a–d)49. Injection of 1 µl of high titer VSVg pseudotyped
lentivirus (>109 pfu ml − 1) or AAV (>1012 gc ml − 1) into the cortex or the hippocampus can result in transduction volumes
>1 mm3. Prolonged expression of any membrane protein driven by strong ubiquitous promoters, such as CAG, can lead to
toxicity in neurons. However, when the transgene is driven by a reliable and strong cell-specific promoter, expression can
be very well-tolerated, stable and also specific, with  < 10% of transduced cells belonging to non-targeted cell types as
identified by immunostaining for the marker protein. Thus far, both the human Synapsin I and murine CaMKIIa promoters
have been used in viral systems (lentivirus or AAV) to drive strong pan-neuronal or excitatory neuron-specific expression,
respectively, in the mammalian brain in vivo. The glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter can also be used to drive
astrocyte-specific expression from a lentiviral vector. Other promising cell-specific promoters include ppHcrt8, Sst56 and CCK57
(see Table 2 for a list of previously reported cell-specific promoters). When using cell-specific Cre transgenic mice, 1 µl of
doubly floxed inverted opsin (DIO) Cre-dependent AAV can be delivered to the target brain area to achieve virtually 100%
cell-specific expression in the Cre-expressing cell population.
With both lentivirus and AAV, microbial opsin genes will express stably for at least 6 months after injection, and when
tagged with a fluorescent protein marker, the transduced cells will exhibit strong membrane-localized fluorescence.
Comparatively, ChR2 is better localized to the membrane than NpHR and VChR1, but it may still be difficult to identify the
somata of ChR2–EYFP expressing cells in intact tissue. To improve the visualization and identification of expressing cells,
the optogenetic protein and the fluorescent protein tag can be expressed as two separated proteins using IRES58 or 2A59,60
bicistronic linkers. Expressing different rhodopsins as separate proteins also ensures that both will integrate into the plasma
membrane in the correct orientation. For most reliable optical control of axon terminals (Fig. 4e), it is important to achieve
a high level of expression in the axonal membranes; therefore, although physiological effects can be seen earlier, for viral
mediated expression, it is optimal to wait until 4 or more weeks after injection before conducting experiments.
Electrophysiological validation of functional expression

Figure 4 | Functional expression of microbial
a
b
e
opsin genes in the rodent brain. (a) Fluorescence
500 ms
5 ms
image superimposed on bright field image of the
motor cortex of a wild-type mouse injected with
2 µl lentivirus carrying the CaMKIIαChR2–EYFP
construct, into layer V of the anterior M1 cortical
area (AP 2 mm; ML 2 mm; DV 2 mm); 2 weeks
were allowed for expression before preparing
CaMKllα::ChR2-YFP
200 µm slices that were examined under confocal
c
d
f
(images are z-projection of single planes).
Corpus
200 ms
callosum
(b) The injection produced strong expression in
layer V of the cortex (the dendrites projecting
from layer V neurons to the surface of the brain
are clearly visible). (c) Fibers from layer V of the
cortex travel through the corpus callosum (CC)
and striatum. (d) Axons terminating in target
Striatum
Axon terminals
structures. (e) Optrode recording during optical
stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus of a Thy-1ChR2–EYFP mouse. Example trace shows ten pulses of 5 ms blue light (470 nm) flashes delivered at
20 Hz. At right, zoomed view shows a single 5 ms light flash and resulting evoked spike. (f) Fast all-optical interrogation: typical voltage sensitive dye
imaging signal from an acute horizontal hippocampal slice stained with RH 155. Trace shows the voltage changes in the slice resulting from 10 pulses of
10 ms blue light flashes delivered at 20 Hz. Acquisition rate: 200 Hz. The trace is averaged over four acquisition periods and a region of interest of
147 µm × 133 µm was defined in the entorhinal cortex. (Scale bars: a, 1 mm; b, 500 µm; c, 50 µm; d, 25 µm.)

200 µV

Depending on targeted cell type, the maximal evoked firing frequency will vary (for pyramidal neurons in the neocotex, cells
expressing ChR2 can be driven to fire spikes up to 30 Hz reliably, whereas other cell types such as fast-spiking interneurons
will be able to fire at 100 Hz or more). Spiking properties in targeted cells depend on spike and illumination history as
well as on membrane expression level and local illumination intensity; for any given cell type and circuit, a detailed
characterization should be carried out to determine the efficacy of light evoked spike trains. To track and validate
activity modulation, optrode recordings can be carried out in vivo (Fig. 4e). Artifacts, although much smaller than for
electrical stimulation, can be occasionally observed61; when present, such artifacts are correlated with the onset and
offset of the light pulse; amplitude depends on light power and can be reduced with proper grounding and use of
electrodes with coating extending to the tip and staggered relative to the optical fiber by 300–500 µm, as is typically
important in any case for proper illumination of the recorded area.

0.2%
dA/A

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

Virus-mediated cell-specific expression of microbial opsin genes in neural tissues

454 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

protocol

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

Imaging optogenetically controlled signals using VSD

Voltage-sensitive dyes imaging of optically evoked activity in neural circuits expressing light-gated ion channels allows
for fast, all-optical interrogation and quantification of the spatiotemporal dynamics of ex vivo circuits. In general, brain
sections prepared from younger animals ( < 6 weeks) yield optimal signals; however, older animals may still be used but
with reduced signal properties. Brain sections should be prepared with sufficient thickness to preserve network connections
in the target circuit (e.g., ~300 µm for mice and ~400 µm for rats). Because of the inherently low signal of VSDI (~0.1%
change in absorbance or fluorescence) and high levels of optical noise, averaging individual pixels over multiple trials is
often necessary. Along with averaging these pixels over time, several pixels can also be averaged over space (with reference
to anatomical landmarks) to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. Software provided by Scimedia or other fast camera
producers (i.e., Redshirtimaging) can carry out these initial tasks. However, more advanced post-processing and quantitative
analysis methods are often carried out in our laboratory using algorithms written in Matlab47, available upon request.
Optical stimulation of brain sections from a Thy1ChR2–YFP transgenic mouse with blue (470 nm) light reveals
quantitatively reproducible optical changes in the brain tissue (Fig. 4f). The signal is typically strongest in the CA1 region,
where ChR2 expression is highest. Signals are also seen in the entorhinal cortex, the subiculum and the dentate gyrus as
a result of both direct activation of ChR2 and percolating circuit activity.
Acknowledgments We thank the entire Deisseroth laboratory for their support.
F.Z. is supported by an NIH NRSA. V.G. is supported by SGF and SIGF (Stanford
Graduate Fellowships). A.R.A. is supported by the Fonds National de la Recherche
Scientifique, NARSAD, NIH (K99) and the Fondation Leon Fredericq. L.d.L. is
supported by NIDA, DARPA and NARSAD. K.D. is supported by the William M.
Keck Foundation, the Snyder Foundation, the Albert Yu and Mary Bechmann
Foundation and the Wallace Coulter Foundation, as well as by California Institute
for Regenerative Medicine, the McKnight Foundation, the Esther A. and Joseph
Klingenstein Fund, NSF, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute
on Drug Abuse and the NIH Pioneer Award.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS  F.Z., V.G., A.R.A., R.D.A., R.D., L.d.L. and K.D. wrote
the manuscript.
Published online at http://www.natureprotocols.com. 	
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions.
1.	 Boyden, E.S., Zhang, F., Bamberg, E., Nagel, G. & Deisseroth, K.
Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical control of neural
activity. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1263–1268 (2005).
2.	 Zhang, F., Wang, L.P., Boyden, E.S. & Deisseroth, K. Channelrhodopsin-2
and optical control of excitable cells. Nat. Methods 3, 785–792 (2006).
3.	 Zhang, F. et al. Red-shifted optogenetic excitation: a tool for fast
neural control derived from Volvox carteri. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 631–633
(2008).
4.	 Zhang, F. et al. Multimodal fast optical interrogation of neural circuitry.
Nature 446, 633–639 (2007).
5.	 Airan, R.D., Thompson, K.R., Fenno, L.E., Bernstein, H. & Deisseroth, K.
Temporally precise in vivo control of intracellular signalling. Nature 458,
1025–1029 (2009).
6.	 Deisseroth, K. et al. Next-generation optical technologies for illuminating
genetically targeted brain circuits. J. Neurosci. 26, 10380–10386 (2006).
7.	 Zhang, F., Aravanis, A.M., Adamantidis, A., de Lecea, L. & Deisseroth, K.
Circuit-breakers: optical technologies for probing neural signals and
systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 577–581 (2007).
8.	 Adamantidis, A.R., Zhang, F., Aravanis, A.M., Deisseroth, K. & de Lecea, L.
Neural substrates of awakening probed with optogenetic control of
hypocretin neurons. Nature 450, 420–424 (2007).
9.	 Gradinaru, V., Mogri, M., Thompson, K.R., Henderson, J.M. & Deisseroth,
K. Optical deconstruction of parkinsonian neural circuitry. Science 324,
354–359 (2009).
10.	 Sohal, V.S., Zhang, F., Yizhar, O. & Deisseroth, K. Parvalbumin neurons
and gamma rhythms enhance cortical circuit performance. Nature 459,
698–702 (2009).
11.	 Tsai, H.C. et al. Phasic firing in dopaminergic neurons is sufficient for
behavioral conditioning. Science 324, 1080–1084 (2009).
12.	 Bi, A. et al. Ectopic expression of a microbial-type rhodopsin restores
visual responses in mice with photoreceptor degeneration. Neuron 50,
23–33 (2006).
13.	 Petreanu, L., Huber, D., Sobczyk, A. & Svoboda, K. Channelrhodopsin-2assisted circuit mapping of long-range callosal projections. Nat. Neurosci.
10, 663–668 (2007).

14.	 Alilain, W.J. et al. Light-induced rescue of breathing after spinal cord
injury. J. Neurosci. 28, 11862–11870 (2008).
15.	 Huber, D. et al. Sparse optical microstimulation in barrel cortex drives
learned behaviour in freely moving mice. Nature 451, 61–64 (2008).
16.	 Lima, S.Q., Hromadka, T., Znamenskiy, P. & Zador, A.M. PINP: a new
method of tagging neuronal populations for identification during in vivo
electrophysiological recording. PLoS ONE 4, e6099 (2009).
17.	 Hira, R. et al. Transcranial optogenetic stimulation for functional mapping
of the motor cortex. J. Neurosci. Methods 179, 258–263 (2009).
18.	 Petreanu, L., Mao, T., Sternson, S.M. & Svoboda, K. The subcellular
organization of neocortical excitatory connections. Nature 457,
1142–1145 (2009).
19.	 Arenkiel, B.R. & Peca, J. Using light to reinstate respiratory plasticity.
J. Neurophysiol. 101, 1695–1698 (2009).
20.	 Nagel, G. et al. Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly light-gated cation-selective
membrane channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 13940–13945
(2003).
21.	 Gradinaru, V., Thompson, K.R. & Deisseroth, K. eNpHR: a Natronomonas
halorhodopsin enhanced for optogenetic applications. Brain Cell Biol. 36,
129–139 (2008).
22.	 Zhao, S. et al. Improved expression of halorhodopsin for light-induced
silencing of neuronal activity. Brain Cell Biol. 36, 141–154 (2008).
23.	 Nagel, G. et al. Light activation of channelrhodopsin-2 in excitable cells
of Caenorhabditis elegans triggers rapid behavioral responses. Curr. Biol.
15, 2279–2284 (2005).
24.	 Gradinaru, V. et al. Targeting and readout strategies for fast optical neural
control in vitro and in vivo. J. Neurosci. 27, 14231–14238 (2007).
25.	 Berndt, A., Yizhar, O., Gunaydin, L.A., Hegemann, P. & Deisseroth, K.
Bi-stable neural state switches. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 229–234 (2009).
26.	 Luo, L., Callaway, E.M. & Svoboda, K. Genetic dissection of neural circuits.
Neuron 57, 634–660 (2008).
27.	 Luan, H. & White, B.H. Combinatorial methods for refined neuronal gene
targeting. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 572–580 (2007).
28.	 Wickersham, I.R. et al. Monosynaptic restriction of transsynaptic tracing
from single, genetically targeted neurons. Neuron 53, 639–647 (2007).
29.	 Dittgen, T. et al. Lentivirus-based genetic manipulations of cortical
neurons and their optical and electrophysiological monitoring in vivo.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 18206–18211 (2004).
30.	 Navarro-Quiroga, I., Chittajallu, R., Gallo, V. & Haydar, T.F. Long-term,
selective gene expression in developing and adult hippocampal pyramidal
neurons using focal in utero electroporation. J. Neurosci. 27, 5007–5011
(2007).
31.	 Borrell, V., Yoshimura, Y. & Callaway, E.M. Targeted gene delivery to
telencephalic inhibitory neurons by directional in utero electroporation.
J. Neurosci. Methods. 143, 151–158 (2005).
32.	 Arenkiel, B.R. et al. In vivo light-induced activation of neural circuitry in
transgenic mice expressing channelrhodopsin-2. Neuron 54, 205–218
(2007).
33.	 Wang, H. et al. High-speed mapping of synaptic connectivity using
photostimulation in Channelrhodopsin-2 transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci USA 104, 8143–8148 (2007).
34.	 Zhang, F. Fast optical neural circuit interrogation technology: development
and applications. In Larry M. Katz Memorial Lecture, Cold Spring Harbor

nature protocols | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | 455

© 2010 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureprotocols

protocol
Laboratory Meeting on Neuronal Circuits (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,
Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 2008).
35.	 Kuhlman, S.J. & Huang, Z.J. High-resolution labeling and functional
manipulation of specific neuron types in mouse brain by Cre-activated
viral gene expression. PLoS. ONE 3, e2005 (2008).
36.	 Atasoy, D., Aponte, Y., Su, H.H. & Sternson, S.M. A FLEX switch targets
Channelrhodopsin-2 to multiple cell types for imaging and long-range
circuit mapping. J. Neurosci. 28, 7025–7030 (2008).
37.	 Maskos, U., Kissa, K., St Cloment, C. & Brulet, P. Retrograde transsynaptic transfer of green fluorescent protein allows the genetic mapping
of neuronal circuits in transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99,
10120–10125 (2002).
38.	 Sugita, M. & Shiba, Y. Genetic tracing shows segregation of taste neuronal
circuitries for bitter and sweet. Science 309, 781–785 (2005).
39.	 Callaway, E.M. Transneuronal circuit tracing with neurotropic viruses.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 18, 617–623 (2008).
40.	 Boldogkoi, Z. et al. Genetically timed, activity-sensor and rainbow
transsynaptic viral tools. Nat. Methods 6, 127–130 (2009).
41.	 Lewis Jr., T.L., Mao, T., Svoboda, K. & Arnold, D.B. Myosin-dependent
targeting of transmembrane proteins to neuronal dendrites. Nat. Neurosci.
12, 568–576 (2009).
42.	 Ebner, T.J. & Chen, G. Use of voltage-sensitive dyes and optical recordings
in the central nervous system. Prog. Neurobiol. 46, 463–506 (1995).
43.	 Kauer, J.S. Real-time imaging of evoked activity in local circuits of the
salamander olfactory bulb. Nature 331, 166–168 (1988).
44.	 Tominaga, T., Tominaga, Y. & Ichikawa, M. Optical imaging of long-lasting
depolarization on burst stimulation in area CA1 of rat hippocampal
slices. J. Neurophysiol. 88, 1523–1532 (2002).
45.	 Muschol, M., Kosterin, P., Ichikawa, M. & Salzberg, B.M. Activitydependent depression of excitability and calcium transients in the
neurohypophysis suggests a model of ‘stuttering conduction’. J. Neurosci.
23, 11352–11362 (2003).
46.	 Grinvald, A. & Hildesheim, R. VSDI: a new era in functional imaging of
cortical dynamics. Nat. Rev. 5, 874–885 (2004).
47.	 Airan, R.D. et al. High-speed imaging reveals neurophysiological links to
behavior in an animal model of depression. Science 317, 819–823
(2007).
48.	 Airan, R.D. et al. Integration of light-controlled neuronal firing and fast
circuit imaging. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 587–592 (2007).
49.	 Aravanis, A.M. et al. An optical neural interface: in vivo control of rodent
motor cortex with integrated fiberoptic and optogenetic technology.
J. Neural Eng. 4, S143–156 (2007).
50.	 Paxinos, G. & Franklin, K. The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates,
2nd edn. (Academic Press, New York, 2001).
51.	 Crawley, N.J. What’s Wrong With My Mouse?: Behavioral. Phenotyping of
Transgenic and Knockout Mice 2nd edn. (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2007).
52.	 Crawley, J.N. et al. Behavioral phenotypes of inbred mouse strains:
implications and recommendations for molecular studies.
Psychopharmacology 132, 107–124 (1997).
53.	 Paxinos, G., Watson, C., Pennisi, M. & Topple, A. Bregma, lambda and the
interaural midpoint in stereotaxic surgery with rats of different sex, strain
and weight. J. Neurosci. Methods 13, 139–143 (1985).
54.	 Cetin, A., Komai, S., Eliava, M., Seeburg, P.H. & Osten, P. Stereotaxic
gene delivery in the rodent brain. Nat. Protoc. 1, 3166–3173 (2006).
55.	 Debanne, D. et al. Paired-recordings from synaptically coupled cortical and
hippocampal neurons in acute and cultured brain slices. Nat. Protoc. 3,
1559–1568 (2008).
56.	 Tan, W. et al. Silencing preBotzinger complex somatostatin-expressing
neurons induces persistent apnea in awake rat. Nat. Neurosci. 11,
538–540 (2008).
57.	 Jasnow, A.M., Ressler, K.J., Hammack, S.E., Chhatwal, J.P. & Rainnie, D.G.
Distinct subtypes of cholecystokinin (CCK)-containing interneurons of the
basolateral amygdala identified using a CCK promoter-specific lentivirus.
J. Neurophysiol. 101, 1494–1506 (2009).

456 | VOL.5 NO.3 | 2010 | nature protocols

58.	 Bochkov, Y.A. & Palmenberg, A.C. Translational efficiency of EMCV IRES in
bicistronic vectors is dependent upon IRES sequence and gene location.
Biotechniques 41, 283–284, 286. 288 passim (2006).
59.	 Holst, J. et al. Generation of T-cell receptor retrogenic mice. Nat. Protoc.
1, 406–417 (2006).
60.	 Tang, W. et al. Faithful expression of multiple proteins via 2A-peptide
self-processing: a versatile and reliable method for manipulating brain
circuits. J. Neurosci. 29, 8621–8629 (2009).
61.	 Zhang, J. et al. Integrated device for optical stimulation and
spatiotemporal electrical recording of neural activity in light-sensitized
brain tissue. J. Neural Eng. 6, 55007 (2009).
62.	 Zhang, Y.P. & Oertner, T.G. Optical induction of synaptic plasticity using
a light-sensitive channel. Nat. Methods 4, 139–141 (2007).
63.	 Ishizuka, T., Kakuda, M., Araki, R. & Yawo, H. Kinetic evaluation of
photosensitivity in genetically engineered neurons expressing green algae
light-gated channels. Neurosci. Res. 54, 85–94 (2006).
64.	 Zhang, Y.P., Holbro, N. & Oertner, T.G. Optical induction of plasticity at
single synapses reveals input-specific accumulation of alphaCaMKII.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 12039–12044 (2008).
65.	 Hwang, R.Y. et al. Nociceptive neurons protect Drosophila larvae from
parasitoid wasps. Curr. Biol. 17, 2105–2116 (2007).
66.	 Pulver, S.R., Pashkovski, S.L., Hornstein, N.J., Garrity, P.A. & Griffith, L.C.
Temporal dynamics of neuronal activation by Channelrhodopsin-2 and
TRPA1 determine behavioral output in Drosophila larvae. J. Neurophysiol.
101, 3075–3088 (2009).
67.	 Schroll, C. et al. Light-induced activation of distinct modulatory neurons
triggers appetitive or aversive learning in Drosophila larvae. Curr. Biol.
16, 1741–1747 (2006).
68.	 Douglass, A.D., Kraves, S., Deisseroth, K., Schier, A.F. & Engert, F. Escape
behavior elicited by single, channelrhodopsin-2-evoked spikes in zebrafish
somatosensory neurons. Curr. Biol. 18, 1133–1137 (2008).
69.	 Li, X. et al. Fast noninvasive activation and inhibition of neural and
network activity by vertebrate rhodopsin and green algae
channelrhodopsin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 17816–17821 (2005).
70.	 Han, X. et al. Millisecond-timescale optical control of neural dynamics in
the nonhuman primate brain. Neuron 62, 191–198 (2009).
71.	 Kugler, S., Kilic, E. & Bahr, M. Human synapsin 1 gene promoter confers
highly neuron-specific long-term transgene expression from an adenoviral
vector in the adult rat brain depending on the transduced area. Gene Ther.
10, 337–347 (2003).
72.	 van den Pol, A.N., Acuna-Goycolea, C., Clark, K.R. & Ghosh, P.K.
Physiological properties of hypothalamic MCH neurons identified with
selective expression of reporter gene after recombinant virus infection.
Neuron 42, 635–652 (2004).
73.	 Han, X. & Boyden, E.S. Multiple-color optical activation, silencing, and
desynchronization of neural activity, with single-spike temporal resolution.
PLoS One 2, e299 (2007).
74.	 Petreanu, L., Mao, T., Sternson, S.M. & Svoboda, K. The subcellular organization
of neocortical excitatory connections. Nature 457, 1142–1145 (2009).
75.	 Lima, S.Q., Hromadka, T., Znamenskiy, P. & Zador, A.M. PINP: a new
method of tagging neuronal populations for identification during in vivo
electrophysiological recording. PLoS One 4, e6099 (2009).
76.	 Rinaman, L. & Schwartz, G. Anterograde transneuronal viral tracing of
central viscerosensory pathways in rats. J. Neurosci. 24, 2782–2786 (2004).
77.	 Suh, G.S., et al. Light activation of an innate olfactory avoidance
response in Drosophila. Curr. Biol. 17, 905–908 (2007).
78.	 Lin, J.Y., Lin, M.Z., Steinback, P. & Tsien, R.Y. Characterization of
engineered channelrhodopsin variants with improved properties and
kinetics. J. Biophys. 96, 1803–1814 (2009).
79.	 Wang, H. et al. Molecular determinants differentiating photocurrent
properties of two channelrhodopsins from chlamydomonas. J. Biol. Chem.
284, 5685–5696 (2009).
80.	 Gunaydin, L.A. et al. Ultrafast optogenetic control. Nat. Neurosci.
advance online publication, doi:10.1038/nn.2495 (17 January 2010).

